content/snippets/dynamic-programming-dp/index.mdx, before:

---
title: "Dynamic Programming (DP)"
date: 2026-01-04
displayDate: "in terms of subproblems in a way that loops on itself"
tags:
  - computer-science
  - interview
---

### What is it: 
- Dynamic programming is the efficient solving of recursion. 
	- Break problems down into subproblems often with memoiztion
	- Not practical when problems don't really overlap
### Common Code Modules Called: 
- lru_cache
## Common DP Subproblems: 
1. Given input sequence of length **n**, want ordered sequence of length **i**
2. Sequence of length **n**, but you need to sort into the right order then you get **i** length sequence
3. Expand from the middle outwards
4. Given 2D Matrix, and then submatrix is the subproblem. 
### Approach 1: Top Down
- Employ answers to the problem's subproblems. 
- If answers to subproblems overlap, they can be memoized or kept in a table for later use
- Top down approach follows 'memoization' strategy
- Remember: 
	- Difference between *recursion* and *caching* is that recursion requires calling the function directly whereas caching requires preserving intermediate results 
- Benefits: 
	- Easy to understand and implement
	- Subproblems solved on request. Users query solutions for each part 
	- Easier to debug. Segmenting problems into small parts allow users to follow solution quickly, determine where an error occurs 
- Bad things: 
	- Recursion is used. More memory in call stack. Worse overall performance -> potentially stack overflow

### Approach 2: Bottom Up
- Solution is written in terms of subproblems in a way that loops on itself
- Users can rewrite problem by solving subproblems first, then use solutions for larger subproblems. 
- Saves memory as a result
- Disadvantages: 
	- Makes decisions about small reusable subproblems and decides how they will be put together to create a larger problem

### Example #1: Climbing Stairs
- You can either climb stairs with one step or two steps. How many ways are there to climb the n stairs? 
- **Brute force recursive:** 
```python
class Solution: 
	def climbStairs(self, n: int) -> int:
		if n == 0 or n == 1:
			return 1
		return self.climbStairs(n - 1) + self.climbStairs(n - 2)
```


- **Memoization**

```python
class Solution: 
	def climbStairs(self, n: int) -> int: 
		memo = {}
		return self.helper(n, memo)

	def helper(self, n: int, memo: dict[int, int]) -> int: 
		if n == 0 or n == 1: 
			return 1
		else: 
			return self.helper(n - 1, memo) + self.helper(n - 2, memo)
```


```python
def climbStairs(n):
	memo = {}
	return helper(n, memo)

def helper(n, memo): 
	if n == 0 or n == 1: 
		return 1
	else: 
		return helper(n - 1, memo) + helper(n - 2, memo)
```

- **Tabulation**
	- Eliminate recursion, use bottom up to solve problem iteratively
	- Creates DP table of size n + 1 to store ways to reach each step. 
	- Iterates from 2 to n filling in DP table by summing up values in previous steps, returns last cell of DP table
```python
class Solution: 
	def climbStairs(self, n: int) -> int:
		if n == 0 or n == 1:
			return 1
		dp = [0] (n + 1)
		dp[0] = dp[1] = 1

		for i in range(2, n + 1)
			dp[i] = dp[i - 1] + dp[i - 2]
		return dp[n]
```
- **Space optimised solution**
	- Reduce space complexity by using only two variables `prev` and `curr` instead of DP table
```python
class Solution: 
	def climbStairs(self, n: int) -> int:
		if n == 0 or n ==1:
			return 1
		prev, curr = 1, 1
		for in range(2, n + 1):
			temp = curr
			curr = prev + curr
			prev = temp
		return curr
```
### Example #2: Coin Change

**Example 1:**

**Input:** coins = [1,2,5], amount = 11
**Output:** 3
**Explanation:** 11 = 5 + 5 + 1

```python
class solution: 
	def coinChange(self, coins: List[int], amount:int) -> int:
		if amount < coin for coin in coins:
			return -1
		elif amount == coin for coin in coins:
			return 1
		else: 
			return coinChange(self)
```

- **Bottom up recursion (DP) approach**
	- Compute the least number of coins to make `<index>` amount. 
	- ex) We have 1, 3 as coins
	- 0 is 0
	- 1 is 0
	- 2 is 2
	- 3 is 3 coins. However, we check 3 coins. So it is 1. (3 is 1)
	- 4. Try subtracting 1. Then we refer to the value we computed for 3. Also try subtracting 3, then we refer to our value for 1. 

```python
def coinChange(coins, amount):
	dp = [0] + ([float('inf')] * amount)
	for i in range(1, amount + 1):
		for coin in co ins:
			if coin <= i:
				dp[i] = min(dp[i], dp[i - coin] + 1)

	if dp[-1] == float('inf'):
		return -1
	return dp[-1]
```

### Example 3: Longest Increasing Subsequence 
- DP + binary searhc

```python
class Solution: 
	def lengthofLIS(self, nums):
		n = len(nums)
		if n == 0: 
			return 0
		dp = [0] * n # This creates an array of the last element of current LIS
		length = 1
		dp[0] = nums[0]

		for i in range(1, n):
			if nums[i] > dp[length-1]: # Nums is greater than last element of current LIS. Extends this by addings nums[i] to dp array at length position. 
				dp[length] = nums[i]
				length += 1
			else: 
				index = self.binary_search(dp, 0, length - 1, nums[i])
				dp[index] = nums[i]

	# Point of this search is to find first position in dp list where elemnt is greater or equal to target. 
	def binary_search(self, dp, left, right, target):
		while left < right: 
			mid = left + (right - left) // 2
			if dp[mid] < target: 
				left = mid + 1
			else: 
				right = mid

		return left 
```


### 4. Box Stacking: 

*[Image: Screenshot 2024-08-20 at 3.42.59 pm.png]*

```python
def tallestStack(boxes):
	boxes.sort(key=lambda x: x[0])
	heights = {box:box[2] for box in boxes}

	for i in range(1, len(boxes)):
		box = boxes[i]
		S = [boxes[j] for j in range(i) if canBeStacked(boxes[j], box)]
		heights[box] = box[2] + max([heights[box] for box in S], default=0)
	return max(heights.values(), default=0)

def canBeStacked(top, bottom):
	return top[0] < bottom[0] and top[1] < bottom[1]
```




### Constructing DP Matrix

```python

dp = [0 for _ in range(len(words))]

adj_matrix = [[0] * len(words) for _ in range(len(words))]
```


### Longest String Chain




```python
import numpy as np


class Solution:
	def numSquares(self, n: int) -> int:
		# Initialize dp array with a large number (infinity) except for dp[0] = 0
		dp = [float('inf')] * (n + 1)
		dp[0] = 0
		
		# Iterate through all possible perfect squares
		for num in range(1, int(np.sqrt(n)) + 1):
			square = num * num
			for targetIdx in range(square, n + 1):
				dp[targetIdx] = min(dp[targetIdx], dp[targetIdx - square] + 1)

		return dp[n]
```

Commit message:

Fix LaTeX support for snippets - automatic Math component conversion
The Obsidian packager now:
1. Detects LaTeX syntax ($...$ and $$...$$) in content
2. Converts to <Math> component syntax for MDX compatibility
3. Auto-imports Math component when needed

This prevents MDX from interpreting $ as JSX expression delimiters,
which was causing 'Can't find variable' errors during SSR builds.

LaTeX in Obsidian notes now renders correctly in the blog.

content/snippets/dynamic-programming-dp/index.mdx, after:

---
title: "Dynamic Programming (DP)"
date: 2026-01-04
displayDate: "in terms of subproblems in a way that loops on itself"
tags:
  - computer-science
  - interview
---

import Math from "../../../src/components/Math"

### What is it: 
- Dynamic programming is the efficient solving of recursion. 
	- Break problems down into subproblems often with memoiztion
	- Not practical when problems don't really overlap
### Common Code Modules Called: 
- lru_cache
## Common DP Subproblems: 
1. Given input sequence of length <Math>{"n"}</Math>, want ordered sequence of length <Math>{"i"}</Math>
2. Sequence of length <Math>{"n"}</Math>, but you need to sort into the right order then you get <Math>{"i"}</Math> length sequence
3. Expand from the middle outwards
4. Given 2D Matrix, and then submatrix is the subproblem. 
### Approach 1: Top Down
- Employ answers to the problem's subproblems. 
- If answers to subproblems overlap, they can be memoized or kept in a table for later use
- Top down approach follows 'memoization' strategy
- Remember: 
	- Difference between *recursion* and *caching* is that recursion requires calling the function directly whereas caching requires preserving intermediate results 
- Benefits: 
	- Easy to understand and implement
	- Subproblems solved on request. Users query solutions for each part 
	- Easier to debug. Segmenting problems into small parts allow users to follow solution quickly, determine where an error occurs 
- Bad things: 
	- Recursion is used. More memory in call stack. Worse overall performance -> potentially stack overflow

### Approach 2: Bottom Up
- Solution is written in terms of subproblems in a way that loops on itself
- Users can rewrite problem by solving subproblems first, then use solutions for larger subproblems. 
- Saves memory as a result
- Disadvantages: 
	- Makes decisions about small reusable subproblems and decides how they will be put together to create a larger problem

### Example #1: Climbing Stairs
- You can either climb stairs with one step or two steps. How many ways are there to climb the n stairs? 
- **Brute force recursive:** 
```python
class Solution: 
	def climbStairs(self, n: int) -> int:
		if n == 0 or n == 1:
			return 1
		return self.climbStairs(n - 1) + self.climbStairs(n - 2)
```


- **Memoization**

```python
class Solution: 
	def climbStairs(self, n: int) -> int: 
		memo = {}
		return self.helper(n, memo)

	def helper(self, n: int, memo: dict[int, int]) -> int: 
		if n == 0 or n == 1: 
			return 1
		else: 
			return self.helper(n - 1, memo) + self.helper(n - 2, memo)
```


```python
def climbStairs(n):
	memo = {}
	return helper(n, memo)

def helper(n, memo): 
	if n == 0 or n == 1: 
		return 1
	else: 
		return helper(n - 1, memo) + helper(n - 2, memo)
```

- **Tabulation**
	- Eliminate recursion, use bottom up to solve problem iteratively
	- Creates DP table of size n + 1 to store ways to reach each step. 
	- Iterates from 2 to n filling in DP table by summing up values in previous steps, returns last cell of DP table
```python
class Solution: 
	def climbStairs(self, n: int) -> int:
		if n == 0 or n == 1:
			return 1
		dp = [0] (n + 1)
		dp[0] = dp[1] = 1

		for i in range(2, n + 1)
			dp[i] = dp[i - 1] + dp[i - 2]
		return dp[n]
```
- **Space optimised solution**
	- Reduce space complexity by using only two variables `prev` and `curr` instead of DP table
```python
class Solution: 
	def climbStairs(self, n: int) -> int:
		if n == 0 or n ==1:
			return 1
		prev, curr = 1, 1
		for in range(2, n + 1):
			temp = curr
			curr = prev + curr
			prev = temp
		return curr
```
### Example #2: Coin Change

**Example 1:**

**Input:** coins = [1,2,5], amount = 11
**Output:** 3
**Explanation:** 11 = 5 + 5 + 1

```python
class solution: 
	def coinChange(self, coins: List[int], amount:int) -> int:
		if amount < coin for coin in coins:
			return -1
		elif amount == coin for coin in coins:
			return 1
		else: 
			return coinChange(self)
```

- **Bottom up recursion (DP) approach**
	- Compute the least number of coins to make `<index>` amount. 
	- ex) We have 1, 3 as coins
	- 0 is 0
	- 1 is 0
	- 2 is 2
	- 3 is 3 coins. However, we check 3 coins. So it is 1. (3 is 1)
	- 4. Try subtracting 1. Then we refer to the value we computed for 3. Also try subtracting 3, then we refer to our value for 1. 

```python
def coinChange(coins, amount):
	dp = [0] + ([float('inf')] * amount)
	for i in range(1, amount + 1):
		for coin in co ins:
			if coin <= i:
				dp[i] = min(dp[i], dp[i - coin] + 1)

	if dp[-1] == float('inf'):
		return -1
	return dp[-1]
```

### Example 3: Longest Increasing Subsequence 
- DP + binary searhc

```python
class Solution: 
	def lengthofLIS(self, nums):
		n = len(nums)
		if n == 0: 
			return 0
		dp = [0] * n # This creates an array of the last element of current LIS
		length = 1
		dp[0] = nums[0]

		for i in range(1, n):
			if nums[i] > dp[length-1]: # Nums is greater than last element of current LIS. Extends this by addings nums[i] to dp array at length position. 
				dp[length] = nums[i]
				length += 1
			else: 
				index = self.binary_search(dp, 0, length - 1, nums[i])
				dp[index] = nums[i]

	# Point of this search is to find first position in dp list where elemnt is greater or equal to target. 
	def binary_search(self, dp, left, right, target):
		while left < right: 
			mid = left + (right - left) // 2
			if dp[mid] < target: 
				left = mid + 1
			else: 
				right = mid

		return left 
```


### 4. Box Stacking: 

*[Image: Screenshot 2024-08-20 at 3.42.59 pm.png]*

```python
def tallestStack(boxes):
	boxes.sort(key=lambda x: x[0])
	heights = {box:box[2] for box in boxes}

	for i in range(1, len(boxes)):
		box = boxes[i]
		S = [boxes[j] for j in range(i) if canBeStacked(boxes[j], box)]
		heights[box] = box[2] + max([heights[box] for box in S], default=0)
	return max(heights.values(), default=0)

def canBeStacked(top, bottom):
	return top[0] < bottom[0] and top[1] < bottom[1]
```




### Constructing DP Matrix

```python

dp = [0 for _ in range(len(words))]

adj_matrix = [[0] * len(words) for _ in range(len(words))]
```


### Longest String Chain




```python
import numpy as np


class Solution:
	def numSquares(self, n: int) -> int:
		# Initialize dp array with a large number (infinity) except for dp[0] = 0
		dp = [float('inf')] * (n + 1)
		dp[0] = 0
		
		# Iterate through all possible perfect squares
		for num in range(1, int(np.sqrt(n)) + 1):
			square = num * num
			for targetIdx in range(square, n + 1):
				dp[targetIdx] = min(dp[targetIdx], dp[targetIdx - square] + 1)

		return dp[n]
```
